# Variations in Hospital Charge in USA and Factors explaining those Variations 

With an aim to understand what explains variations in hospital charge for similar or same procedure, Medicare outpatient charge data  is combined with hospital information data obtained from CMS website and visualized the charge data by state and by procedures and mapped by range of charge. Compared distribution of charge for different procedure types. The comparison shows inter state and intra state level variations in hospital charge. Complex and expensive procedures have more variations than simple or less expensive procedures. 

Estimated models using different statistical models mainly Lasso Regression using sklearn machine learning tool and OLS linear regression.
The goal of the prediction models is to see if there are county level health, social and economic factors explaining variations in average charge in USA counties.  The result indicates that counties with more % of uninsured population , % of over 65   and % of African-American charged more to Medicare insured patients. Hospitals are probably shifting cost from uninsured patients to insured patients to compensate less collections from uninsured patients. In contrary, counties with more % of rural communities charged less. However, the model explains only 1/3 of variations in the hospital charge. This may imply hospital charge is more influenced by market power of hospitals and other factors. Including cost to charge ratio  in the prediction  would be a good move to test effect of hospitals market power on hospital charge.
